---
hide:
  - navigation
  - toc
---

# Discussion

Food production, processing, and marketing systems in developing countries are complex. The food production systems are highly fragmented and dependent on a large number of small-scale producers. The current farm structure constrains farmer's capacity to meet domestic and international food safety standards. Although this may have socioeconomic benefits as large quantities of food pass through a multitude of food handlers and middlemen, the risk of exposing food to unhygienic environments, contamination, and adulteration increases. Literacy rate for most farmers and food handlers in developing countries is low; this limits the number of farmers capable of adopting more sophisticated modern agricultural practices, food hygiene, and good food handling practices necessary to meet more stringent food safety requirements.

However, innovative interventions such as organizing farmers into producer groups, establishing collection centers, contract farming arrangements, and creating public–private partnerships to assist farmers can overcome the farm size constraints. Contract farming and farmer groups' arrangement has been a success in meeting stringent food safety and quality standards in Kenya's fresh fruit and vegetable and India's spices, gherkin, and fruit and vegetable export sectors. This arrangement can also assist farmers in obtaining the capital required to make on-farm improvements, improving farming skills through joint extension provision and assistance in acquiring the required certifications.

During the Green Revolution, use of high-yielding seeds together with chemical intensive agriculture that uses massive quantities of fertilizer and pesticides created diverse effects on soil and environmental contamination. This trend had serious implication on the current international food production system, which emphasizes on minimum use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, thus posing serious challenges to management of food safety by developing countries. In the past decades, the structure of food production systems has radically changed with many small scale producers venturing into production of export crops with some successes and failures. Major food safety problems occur as a result of poor post harvest handling and storage of food and also due to inadequate facilities and infrastructure such as the absence or shortage of safe water supply, electricity, storage facilities including cold stores, transport networks, etc.